# About

`herding-cats` is a Scala library for working with [Apache Zookeeper](http://zookeeper.apache.org/).  It uses
[Scalaz (6.x) extensively](http://code.google.com/p/scalaz/), in particular [Scalaz Promises](https://github.com/scalaz/scalaz/blob/master/core/src/main/scala/scalaz/concurrent/Promise.scala) to eliminate structuring your code as a
series of callbacks (i.e.: inversion of control).  The result is a much cleaner way to work with ZooKeeper.

## Status

Still under heavy development, but potentially useful.

## API docs

[Library](http://corruptmemory.github.com/herding-cats/api/library/index.html#com.corruptmemory.herding_cats.package)

## Usage

Interaction with ZooKeeper is done [monadically](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad), in Scala parlance this means using
`for` comprehensions.  Here's an example use:

```scala
object Main {
  com.corruptmemory.herding_cats._
  import scalaz._
  import Scalaz._

  def printer(data:String,data1:String) {
    println("Data: %s".format(data))
    println("Data1: %s".format(data1))
  }

  def foo:Unit = withZK[Unit]("/test/control",ZK("127.0.0.1:2181",5000),()) {
    (zk:ZK) =>
      val reader = zk.reader[Unit]
      val path = reader.path("/foo")
      val path1 = reader.path("/bar")
      for {
        data <- path.data[String]()
        data1<- path1.data[String](false)
      } yield printer(data,data1)
  }

  def main(args:Array[String]) {
    foo
  }
}
```

Let's look at this a bit closer:

```scala
def foo:Unit = withZK[Unit]("/test/control",ZK("127.0.0.1:2181",5000),()) {
```

`withZK` is how you connect to a ZooKeeper cluster.  The first argument is a _control node_.  A _control node_
is an ephemeral node that is used internally by `herding-cats`, at the moment it contains either a `0` meaning
watches are ignored or a `1` meaning watches are enabled.  The exact content of this node is likely to change over
time, but there you go.  An additional usage is to "tickle" your handler in the event that a watched node gets deleted,
sadly deleting a watched node does not trigger a watch, but deleting the control node will re-execute your handler
function (i.e. the body), typically returning your configuration to a healthy state.  The type `Unit` is the type
returned by the handler function.  The call to `withZK` does not exit but keeps re-invoking the body whenever a
watched node (or the control node) changes.  By default any node you access is added to the watch list.

The next argument to `withZK` is:

```scala
ZK("127.0.0.1:2181",5000)
```

This guy produces a _connection factory_ to a ZooKeeper cluster.  The first argument to `ZK` can contain multiple endpoints
separated by commas as documented in the [ZooKeeper constructor](http://zookeeper.apache.org/doc/r3.3.3/api/org/apache/zookeeper/ZooKeeper.html#ZooKeeper(java.lang.String, int, org.apache.zookeeper.Watcher\)).
Example: `"127.0.0.1:3000,127.0.0.1:3001,127.0.0.1:3002"`.  Endpoints are of the form `{host}:{port}`.  The second argument
to `ZK` is the connection timeout in milliseconds.

The third argument to `withZK` is the _initial state_ that is manipulated and updated by the handler, in this case the
initial state is unit, `()`.  This state is captured by `withZK` after each invocation of the body and send back in on
subsequent invocations.

Finally, you pass a function (the body) to `withZK`, the type signature of the body is: `ZK => ZKState[S,Unit]` where a `ZK` is a
"connection" generated by the connection factory.  The `ZKState` type wraps a bunch of stuff, you can see the definition [here](https://github.com/corruptmemory/herding-cats/blob/master/src/main/scala/zookeeper.scala#L31).  What this is saying is that your getting a _State monad_ that has as its state a _promise_
that returns values of type `Result`.  A `Result` is a type alias over a Scalaz `Validation`.  In English: a `ZKState` value consumes a state `S` and
promises to either succeed with returning a new value and state (via a promise, this is the bit that handles the async stuff) or you get a nice clean
failure that you can do tests on.  One failure value of particular interest is `Shutdown`, if the function returns that value then `withZK` will exit and
clean up.

Let's look at the body:

```scala
  val reader = zk.reader[Unit]
  val path = reader.path("/foo")
  val path1 = reader.path("/bar")
  for {
    data <- path.data[String]()
    data1<- path1.data[String](false)
  } yield printer(data,data1)
```

From a ZK object you can get a _reader_ or you can create a _writer_ within a scope (more TBD on the writer scope as it relates to disabling watches).  From
a _reader_ you can get a _path_ value that enables access to the data in a node identified on the given path.  The most common operation being to
get the data contained in a node (but there are functions for getting the "stat" and children of a node).  Data stored in ZooKeeper is essentially binary, so you
can supply arbitrary serializers for getting data into and out of a node
(see [serialization.scala](https://github.com/corruptmemory/herding-cats/blob/master/library/src/main/scala/herding_cats/serialization.scala)).  There are also wrappers around [sbinary](https://github.com/corruptmemory/sbinary).  The above example is using simple literal `String` serialization/deserialization.  The second example from `path1` is indicating
that is does *not* wish to watch the node at path `"/bar"`.  Again the `Unit` type in: `val reader = zk.reader[Unit]` is the type of the "state" to be transformed by
the body.

## Recipes

[Leader Election](https://github.com/corruptmemory/herding-cats/wiki/Leader-Election)

[Simple Load Balancing](https://github.com/corruptmemory/herding-cats/wiki/Simple-Load-Balancing)

## License

Licensed under Apache 2.0, see `LICENSE.txt` for details.
